so it's pouring outside when you get on
a plane
if you were in a car you'd simply switch
on the windshield wipers and the
headlights after turning the key in the
ignition
do pilots do that airplanes spark so
many questions
and it's time for some answers do planes
have
windshield wipers yes commercial planes
do
but they're only used during taxiing
takeoff and landing
once a plane reaches its cruising
altitude pilots turn them off
the plane's speed is fast enough to
clear the windshields from rain
wipers might be absent on single engine
airplanes because the propeller
airstream blows strong enough to keep
the water away
what happens when a plane loses one
engine in flight
actually it goes hey has anybody seen my
engine
it was just here a second ago no nothing
special
the plane actually just keeps flying
there are certificates for planes flying
over oceans or long distances
that state how long they can do it for
example
the boeing 787 can fly for more than
five hours without the second engine
it's enough for pilots to plan a safe
landing
well why is it so cold on a plane the
temperature on board averages 74 degrees
fahrenheit
about the same as in most office
buildings but you feel so
cold because your body doesn't move much
producing less heat to worm itself
the crew doesn't turn the heat up
because hot air can cause some
passengers to faint during the flight
do airplanes have horns yeah and some of
them have a whole trumpet section
actually yes they do have horns but
pilots don't use it to scare away birds
or
get other aircraft's attention in the
sky
hey move over buddy actually you can
hear that high-pitched chime only on the
ground when the plane isn't moving
like when an engineer checks something
in the cockpit and wants to get the
attention of a ground crew member
why do planes leave white trails in the
sky
it happens when the engine burns fuel it
ejects water and carbon dioxide
that gets mixed with the atmosphere and
since the air is cold at high altitude
and this exhaust is hot the water
condenses and may freeze
creating those white tails do airplanes
have brakes
yes there are multiple disc brakes made
of carbon steel material
similar to the ones in your car but
using them only isn't enough to stop the
plane when it touches the ground
the braking system also includes
different surfaces that slide
out of the wings and disrupt the airflow
can a plane door open mid-flight the
cabin pressure is the force that won't
let that happen
if someone tried to do it they would
have to overcome more than 24 000
pounds of pressure the weight of a ship
anchor
plus there are lock bolts deep inside
the aircraft structure that hold the
door in place
what happens when lightning hits a plane
now statistics say this happens to every
commercial plane about once a year
but the aircraft's metal parts and
lightning protection systems
prevent electrical buildup so in most
cases
this leaves a plane with only a scorch
mark on its surface
why don't the seats and windows always
line up
good question all commercial planes are
designed with seats and windows
perfectly aligned
but when an airline buys a jet it often
chooses to add
extra seats more seats mean more
passengers
and more tickets sold and less of a view
and less leg room for you
see how that works why do flight
attendants touch the overhead
compartment
you think that they're checking to see
if it's closed tightly
but nope they use a scalloped handrail
hidden at the bottom of the overhead
compartment
for a steadier walk along the aisle
what are those white spiral marks on
engines for
well since the ground staff wear hearing
protection they can't rely on their ears
to decide if it's safe to approach the
plane
seeing that moving swirl on jet engines
prompts them to
stay away from the area why are there
holes
in airplane windows those windows
actually have three panes of plexiglas
the tiny hole is in the middle one it
helps regulate the huge pressure
difference inside and outside the cabin
so the outer pane can handle the load if
the outer pane
happened to break the middle one even
with a hole in it
would still be enough to keep the window
intact that hole
also keeps the windows from fogging up
why are there hooks on the wings if
there is an emergency landing on water
passengers have to step on the slippery
wings to use some emergency exits
that's why crew members secure one end
of a rope to the door frame
and the other to the wing through the
hook another rope is secured in the
second hole
safely leading passengers along the wing
to the inflatable slide
why do the wings have different colored
lights it's for christmas
now that red light on the left wing tip
the green one on the right
and the white one on the tail make up
the plane's navigational lights
they let other pilots know the plane's
position and the direction it's moving
in
toward them or away do planes have
ignition keys
well since ignition keys are usually a
security measure
most commercial planes don't need them
they're locked in hangers under
24 7 surveillance to start the engine
a pilot just pushes buttons and turns
switches
but smaller private planes like a cessna
have ignition keys to start the engine
and even locks on the doors why are
there triangles above the windows
these black and sometimes red stickers
let the crew know which window is best
to look out when they want to check the
moving parts of the wing
if you get motion sickness during the
flight try to choose a seat between the
triangles
for a more comfortable trip how can you
get
extra space on a plane well if you're
lucky enough to get an aisle seat
there's a magic button near the hinge
under the armrest
closest to the aisle press it and the
arm rest will swing up to the back of
your seat
why are most planes white well
this color reflects the sun better than
any other so it helps keep a plane cool
it's also much easier to spot any cracks
dense leaks and
other faults on the white surface and
paint
makes a plane 1200 pounds heavier
causing it to burn more fuel
airlines save money by not painting them
why don't airplanes have parachutes for
passengers
well like paint parachutes would also
add extra weight
around 8 000 pounds plus skydivers must
go through at least 4 hours of training
to learn how to handle a parachute
lastly jumping out of a plane at 35 000
feet in the air is
simply not safe because temperatures at
that altitude
are colder than the arctic minus 65
degrees
why can't planes fly when it's hot well
the molecules in hot air are much more
spread out
to lift a plane you need dense air
that's why it gets harder for a plane to
take off as the temperature increases
besides scorching weather can overheat
the internal machinery
or even melt some of its parts so if it
gets 104 degrees fahrenheit outside
your flight might be delayed why do
planes have round windows
the very first commercial planes had
square ones but after some time
they started flying at a higher altitude
that demanded the cabin be pressurized
frequent pressurization and
depressurization deformed and even broke
windows with corners
they were replaced with round ones since
they withstand the pressure much better
how do the oxygen masks work very well
actually if the cabin is depressurized
at cruising altitude
it loses oxygen the masks provide that
but only for 15 minutes it's okay though
that's long enough for the pilot to
descend lower than ten thousand feet
where the air has more oxygen and people
can breathe normally
what causes turbulence your trip gets
bumpy because of three main reasons
storms mountains and jet streams just
like an ocean
air creates waves when it meets a
mountain and sometimes it has nowhere to
go
but up in strong currents affecting a
plane
jet streams are bands of swift winds
that appear when warm air masses collide
with cold ones
storm clouds push air away creating
unpredictable waves
why do planes sometimes dump fuel if
there is an emergency landing
pilots must quickly get rid of excess
weight since they didn't burn it and get
to the destination runway as light as
they should be
the lighter the plane the softer it'll
touch the ground
so no blown tires or fire
why are the doors on the left side well
the captain usually sits on that side
so aligning the plane with the terminal
jet bridge is easier
they fuel the aircraft and load baggage
on the right side
if passengers are coming in on the left
it doesn't disturb those crews
why do they dim the lights during
takeoff and landing
it takes your eyes up to 30 minutes to
fully adjust to a dark setting
dimming the lights at night or dusk
prepares them in case passengers need to
make an emergency exit
they fade the lights during the day to
save some engine power
why are most plane seats blue
this color is psychologically associated
with safety and reliability
so flight weary passengers feel less
anxious
besides stains and dirt are less visible
on blue seats
now we know